.TH BREATHGSLB.CONF 5 "2026-04-11" "BreathGSLB" "File Formats Manual"
.SH NAME
breathgslb.conf \- configuration format for BreathGSLB

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/breathgslb/config.yaml
.br
.B /etc/breathgslb/zones/*.fwd.yaml
.br
.B /etc/breathgslb/reverse/*.rev.yaml

.SH DESCRIPTION
BreathGSLB is configured from one main YAML file plus optional forward and
reverse zone files loaded from
.B zones_dir
and
.BR reverse_dir .

The current model is:
.IP \[bu] 2
one main config for listeners, timing, GeoIP, TSIG, API, and discovery
.IP \[bu] 2
forward zones in
.B zones_dir
as
.B *.fwd.yaml
.IP \[bu] 2
reverse zones in
.B reverse_dir
as
.B *.rev.yaml
.IP \[bu] 2
primary or discovery-based secondary operation
.IP \[bu] 2
apex and named hosts answered through the same pool model

BreathGSLB is authoritative only. It does not recurse.

.SH RUNTIME MODEL
At query time, resolution is layered in this order:
.IP "1." 3
exact host match in
.B hosts:
.IP "2." 3
host
.B alias
or zone
.B alias_host
.IP "3." 3
.B lightup
synthesis for matching names
.IP "4." 3
apex
.B pools
or legacy apex fields
.IP "5." 3
static records such as
.BR TXT ,
.BR MX ,
.BR CAA ,
.BR RP ,
.BR SSHFP ,
.BR SRV ,
.BR NAPTR ,
and
.BR PTR

For a discovery-based secondary:
.IP "1." 3
load only the main config
.IP "2." 3
transfer the shared catalog zone
.IP "3." 3
reconstruct full zone intent from the catalog payload
.IP "4." 3
AXFR the discovered zones
.IP "5." 3
persist local secondary snapshots for restart durability

.SH GLOBAL SETTINGS
Common top-level keys include:
.TP
.B listen
Fallback bind address, usually
.BR :53 .
.TP
.B listen_addrs
Explicit bind addresses in
.B host:port
form.
.TP
.B interfaces
Derive bind addresses from named interfaces.
.TP
.B zones_dir
Directory containing forward zone files.
.TP
.B reverse_dir
Directory containing reverse zone files.
.TP
.B timeout_sec
Probe and transfer timeout base.
.TP
.B interval_sec
Base interval between health rounds and runtime refresh cycles.
.TP
.B rise
Successes required before a health state becomes UP.
.TP
.B fall
Failures required before a health state becomes DOWN.
.TP
.B jitter_ms
Random delay added to probe scheduling.
.TP
.B cooldown_sec
Minimum dwell time before a tier or pool flips state.
.TP
.B dns64_prefix
Prefix used for synthetic AAAA from A.
.TP
.B edns_buf
Advertised EDNS UDP payload size.
.TP
.B max_records
Maximum A or AAAA records returned in one answer.
.TP
.B log_queries
Enable query logging.
.TP
.B log_file
Log file path.
.TP
.B log_syslog
Enable syslog logging.
.TP
.B tsig.path
Directory used for TSIG key persistence.
.TP
.B geoip
GeoIP enablement and MMDB configuration.
.TP
.B discovery
Shared catalog bootstrap for config-only secondaries.

.SH DISCOVERY
The
.B discovery
block allows a secondary to start from only its main config.

.nf
discovery:
  catalog_zone: "_catalog.breathgslb."
  masters: ["[2a02:8012:bc57:53::1]:53"]
  xfr_source: "2a02:8012:bc57:53a::1"
  tsig:
    default_algorithm: "hmac-sha256"
    keys:
      \- name: "lightitup-xfr."
        secret: ""
.fi

Fields:
.TP
.B catalog_zone
Shared catalog zone used for bootstrap.
.TP
.B masters
Primaries to query for that catalog.
.TP
.B xfr_source
Optional local source IP for outbound AXFR. Only set this when that exact
address exists on the local host.
.TP
.B tsig
Shared transfer/bootstrap key material.

.SH ZONES
Each zone entry defines one authoritative zone.

.nf
\- name: "lightitup.zerodns.co.uk."
  ns: ["gslb.zerodns.co.uk.", "gslb2.zerodns.co.uk."]
  admin: "hostmaster.zerodns.co.uk."
  ttl_soa: 60
  ttl_answer: 20
  refresh: 60
  retry: 10
  expire: 90
  minttl: 60
  serve: "primary"
.fi

Important fields:
.TP
.B name
Zone FQDN.
.TP
.B ns
Published authoritative NS set.
.TP
.B admin
SOA mailbox in dotted form.
.TP
.B ttl_soa
SOA TTL.
.TP
.B ttl_answer
Default TTL for dynamic A and AAAA answers.
.TP
.B refresh
SOA refresh timer.
.TP
.B retry
SOA retry timer.
.TP
.B expire
SOA expire timer.
.TP
.B minttl
SOA minimum TTL.
.TP
.B serve
Zone role:
.BR primary ,
.BR local ,
or
.BR secondary .
.TP
.B masters
Upstream primaries for a secondary zone.
.TP
.B xfr_source
Optional source IP used when the zone AXFRs from a master.

.SH APEX MODEL
There are two apex answer models:
.IP \[bu] 2
legacy apex fields such as
.BR a_master ,
.BR aaaa_master ,
.BR a_standby ,
.BR aaaa_standby ,
.BR a_fallback ,
and related private/local-view fields
.IP \[bu] 2
the current
.B pools
model

Legacy fields remain for compatibility. Pools are the long-term direction.

.SH POOLS
Pools are the current answer-selection model for the apex and for named hosts.

.nf
pools:
  \- name: "public-v6-primary"
    family: "ipv6"
    class: "public"
    role: "primary"
    members:
      \- ip: "2a02:8012:bc57:5353::1"
  \- name: "private-v4-primary"
    family: "ipv4"
    class: "private"
    role: "primary"
    members:
      \- ip: "172.16.0.1"
    client_nets:
      \- "172.16.0.0/24"
.fi

Pool fields:
.TP
.B name
Stable pool identifier used by geo policy.
.TP
.B family
Either
.B ipv4
or
.BR ipv6 .
.TP
.B class
Usually
.B public
or
.BR private .
.TP
.B role
Typically
.BR primary ,
.BR secondary ,
or
.BR fallback .
.TP
.B members
The actual IPs returned in DNS answers.
.TP
.B client_nets
Source CIDRs that make a private pool eligible.

.SH HOSTS
.B hosts:
provides first-class in-zone names.

.nf
hosts:
  \- name: "app"
    health:
      kind: http
      host_header: "app.lightitup.zerodns.co.uk"
      path: "/health"
    pools:
      \- name: "app-v6"
        family: "ipv6"
        class: "public"
        role: "primary"
        members:
          \- ip: "2a02:8012:bc57:5353::10"
.fi

Each host can carry:
.IP \[bu] 2
.B pools
.IP \[bu] 2
.B geo
.IP \[bu] 2
.B health
.IP \[bu] 2
.B alias

Zone health is the default. Host health overrides it when present.

.SH GEO ROUTING
Geo routing uses MaxMind country data from the configured MMDB.

The code reads:
.IP \[bu] 2
.B country.iso_code
.IP \[bu] 2
.B registered_country.iso_code
.IP \[bu] 2
.B continent.code

Those ISO-style codes are matched directly against:
.IP \[bu] 2
.B allow_countries
.IP \[bu] 2
.B allow_continents

Named-pool geo is the preferred model:

.nf
geo:
  eu-v6:
    allow_countries: ["GB", "FR", "DE"]
    allow_continents: ["EU"]
  us-v6:
    allow_countries: ["US", "CA"]
    allow_continents: ["NA"]
  global-v6:
    allow_all: true
.fi

Legacy
.BR geo.master ,
.BR geo.standby ,
and
.B geo.fallback
still work for older configs.

.B geo_answers
is separate from
.BR geo .
It directly overrides returned answers by country or continent.

.SH LIGHTUP
.B lightup
provides deterministic forward and reverse synthesis inside configured owned
prefixes.

.nf
lightup:
  enabled: true
  forward_template: "fresh-{addr}.lightitup.zerodns.co.uk."
  families:
    \- family: "ipv6"
      class: "public"
      prefix: "2a02:8012:bc57:5353::/64"
      respond_aaaa: true
      respond_ptr: true
      exclude:
        \- "2a02:8012:bc57:5353::1/128"
.fi

Purpose:
.IP \[bu] 2
synthetic forward names for addresses you own
.IP \[bu] 2
deterministic PTR generation
.IP \[bu] 2
stable forward/reverse round-tripping

Important behavior:
.IP \[bu] 2
explicit records always win
.IP \[bu] 2
with an explicit
.B forward_template
only names matching that template synthesize
.IP \[bu] 2
excluded ranges are hard deny-ranges inside the lightup prefix
.IP \[bu] 2
exact template names return the embedded address if it is inside the configured
prefix and not excluded

.SH REVERSE ZONES
Delegated reverse zones are first-class YAML files in
.BR reverse_dir .
Files use the
.B *.rev.yaml
suffix.

Reverse zones may contain:
.IP \[bu] 2
explicit PTR records
.IP \[bu] 2
generated PTR data requested by
.B reverse: true
on configured addresses
.IP \[bu] 2
lightup synthetic PTRs for owned prefixes

BreathGSLB product policy is stricter than bare DNS syntax here:
.IP \[bu] 2
forward zones must not define direct PTR records
.IP \[bu] 2
reverse zones must not define pools, hosts, ALIAS, geo steering, health, or
forward-style static records

.SH DNSSEC
DNSSEC supports:
.IP \[bu] 2
manual or generated key material
.IP \[bu] 2
plain NSEC or NSEC3
.IP \[bu] 2
signed primary answers
.IP \[bu] 2
signed secondary answers using transferred signed data

For generated keys, use stable key paths under
.BR /etc/breathgslb/keys/ .

.SH TRANSFERS AND TSIG
Per-zone
.B tsig
and shared
.B discovery.tsig
support signed zone transfers.

.B allow_xfr_from
accepts:
.IP \[bu] 2
exact IPv4 addresses
.IP \[bu] 2
exact IPv6 addresses
.IP \[bu] 2
IPv4 CIDRs
.IP \[bu] 2
IPv6 CIDRs

Use
.B xfr_source
only when the chosen source IP is actually configured on the local host.

.SH ALIAS, CNAME, AND OTHER RECORDS
The current schema supports:
.IP \[bu] 2
zone apex
.B alias
.IP \[bu] 2
host
.B alias
.IP \[bu] 2
map-based host ALIAS through
.B alias_host
.IP \[bu] 2
named host
.B A
and
.B AAAA
through
.B hosts
and
.B pools
.IP \[bu] 2
static
.BR TXT ,
.BR MX ,
.BR CAA ,
.BR RP ,
.BR SSHFP ,
.BR SRV ,
.BR NAPTR ,
and
.BR PTR

There is not currently a first-class
.B cname
section in the zone schema.

Use:
.IP \[bu] 2
.B hosts
for real in-zone
.B A
and
.B AAAA
.IP \[bu] 2
.B alias
or
.B alias_host
for ALIAS-style behavior
.IP \[bu] 2
.B lightup
for deterministic synthetic names

.SH FILES
.TP
.B /etc/breathgslb/config.yaml
Main config.
.TP
.B /etc/breathgslb/zones/
Forward zone files.
.TP
.B /etc/breathgslb/reverse/
Reverse zone files.
.TP
.B /etc/breathgslb/keys/
DNSSEC key material.
.TP
.B /etc/breathgslb/tsig/
TSIG key material.
.TP
.B /etc/breathgslb/serials/
Persisted SOA serial state.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR breathgslb (8)
